# Keywords and Identifiers

## Character set

A character set is a set of alphabets, letters, and some special characters that are valid in C language.

### Alphabets

```
Lowercase: a b c ..... x y z
Uppercase: A B C ..... X Y Z
```

Both upper and lowercase alphabets can be used as names for variables and functions.

### Digits

```
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
```

### Special Characters

```
, < > . _ ( ) ; $ : % [ ] # ? ' " & { } ^ ! * / | \ ~ + -
```

Special characters have some or the other special function/meaning in the language.

### White space characters

Blank space(` `), Newline (`\n` or `\r\n`), Horizontal tab (`\t`), Carriage return (`\r`) and (`\f`)

## Keywords

Keywords are predefined, reserved words used in programming that have special meanings to the compiler. Keywords are part of the syntax and they cannot be used as an identifier.  
For example, `int` is a keyword and thus, it cannot be used as the name of a variable.  
C is a case sensitive language and all keywords are written in lowercase.

Here is a list of keywords allowed in ANSI C (more on this later).

|||C Keywords|||
|:--------:|:--------:|:------:|:------:|:------:|
|    int   |   auto   | double | struct |  break |
|   else   |   long   | switch |  case  |  enum  |
| register |  typedef |  char  | extern | return |
|   union  | continue |   for  | signed |  void  |
|   do  | if |   static  | while |  default  |
| goto | sizeof | volatile | const | float |
|short | unsigned|


## Identifiers

Identifiers refers to name given to entities such as variables, functions, structures, etc.  
Identifiers must be unique. They are created to give a unique name to an entity to identify it during the execution of the program.

For example:  
`int money;`  
Here, 'money' is the identifier that identifies a variable named money that stores values of "int" type.  
NOTE: Identifier names must be different from keywords. You cannot use keywords as identifiers.

### Rules for naming identifiers

- A valid identifier can have letters (both uppercase and lowercase letters), digits and underscores.
- The first letter of an identifier should be either a letter or an underscore.
- You cannot use keywords like `int`, `while`, etc. as identifiers.
- There is no rule on how long an identifier can be. However, you may run into problems in some compilers if the identifier is longer than 31 characters.

You can choose any name as an identifier if you follow the above rule, however, give meaningful names to identifiers that make sense.

## Note on ANSI C

Initially, C was developed by Dennis Ritchie at AT&T Bell Labs between 1969 and 1973. It has a free-format program source code. C is a general-purpose programming language. ANSI C is a set of successive standards which were published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) for the C programming language. The ANSI specifies the syntax and semantics of programs written in C.

You can read more about the difference between different specifications of C in the following resources:
- [Difference between C and ANSI C](https://developerinsider.co/difference-between-c-and-ansi-c/)
- [Stack Overflow - C standards](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/17206568/what-is-the-difference-between-c-c99-ansi-c-and-gnu-c)
- [ANSI C wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_C#Compilers_supporting_ANSI_C)
