# Variables, Constants, and Literals

## Variables

A variable can be thought of as a container to hold data/values.  
To indicate a variable, it should be given a unique name (identifier). Variable names are just the symbolic representation of a memory location.

```C
int marks = 35;
```

In the above case, `int` is the type of data we want to store in the variable, `marks` is its identifier, and `35` is the value that is assigned to the variable by using the `=` operator.

As the name indicates, the value inside a variable can *vary*. Thus, we can re-assign some other value to the `marks` variable again if we want, like this:

```C
int marks = 35;
marks = 40;
```

Note: We wont have to declare the type of the variable again as it was defined in the previous statement.

You can even declare multiple variables in C:

```C
int num1, num2;
```

### Rules for naming variables

The rules for naming variables is the same as the [rules for naming identifiers in C](https://byte-sized-code.github.io/LearnC/0.%20Keywords%20and%20Identifiers.html#rules-for-naming-identifiers).

C is a strongly types language. This means that the variable type once declared cannot be changed later in the program. For example:

```C
int number = 5;   // integer type declared
number = 5.5      // error
double number;    // error
```

Here the variable `number` was first declared to be an `int`, thus, you cannot assign a floating-point (decimal) value to it or re-declare it to be a `double` type variable.

## Literals

Literals are symbols/data used for representing fixed values. They can be used directly in code. For example, `1`, `2.5`, `c`, etc are literals.

### Integers

An integer is a numeric literal (associated with numbers)  without any fractional or exponential part. There are three types of integer literals in C:
- decimal (base 10)
- octal (base 8)
- hexadecimal (base 16)

For example:

```
Decimal: 0, -9, 22, etc
Octal: 021, 077, 033, etc
Hexadecimal: 0x7f, 0x2a, 0x521, etc
```

Octal literals start with `0` and hexadecimal literals start with `0x`.

### Floating-point Literals

A floating-point literal is a numeric literal that has either a fractional form or an exponent form. For example:

```
-2.0
0.0000234
-0.22E-5
```

NOTE: E-5 = 10<sup>-5</sup>

### Characters

A character literal is created by enclosing a single character inside single quotation marks. For example:

```
'a', 'm', 'F', '2', '('
```

### Escape Sequences

Escape sequences are used to denote characters that cannot be directly typed or that have a special meaning in C.

| Escape Sequences | Character Denoted |
|:---:|:---:|
|\b|Backspace|
|\f|Form feed|
|\n|Newline|
|\r|Return|
|\t|Horizontal Tab|
|\v|Vertical Tab|
|\\|Backslash|
|\'|Single quotation mark|
|\"|Double quotation mark|
|\?|Question mark|
|\0|Null character|

The backslash ('\') character causes escape from the normal way the characters are handled by the compiler.

### String Literals

A string literal is a sequence of characters enclosed in double-quote marks. For example:

```C
"good"              // string constant
""                  // null string constant
"    "              // string constant with 4 white spaces
"x"                 // string constant with a single character
"Earth is round\n"  // prints string with a newline
```

## Constants

If you want to define a variable whose value cannot be changed, you can use the `const` keyword. This will create a constant. For example:

```C
const double PI = 3.14;
```

Notice the keyword `const` before the type declaration. Now `PI` is a symbolic constant and its value cannot be changed later in the program.
