# Data Types

In the last lesson we learnt about variables. In C, data types are the different types of data that a variable can hold. For example:

```C
int var;
```

Here the variable `var` can hold `int` (integer) values.

## Basic types

Here's a table containing commonly used types in C for quick access:

| Type | Size(bytes) | Format Specifier |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|int| at least 2, usually 4|%d, %i|
|char|1|%c|
|float|4|%f|
|double|8|%lf|
|short int|2 usually|%hd|
|unsigned int|at least 2, usually 4|%ld, %li|
|long int|at least 4, usually 8|%ld, %li|
|long long int|at least 8|%lld, %lli|
|unsigned long int|at least 4|%lu
|unsigned long long int|at least 8|%llu
|signed char|1|%c
|unsigned char|1|%c
|long double|at least 10, usually 12 or 16|%Lf

Format specifiers are used in I/O in C. We will learn more on them later.

### int

`int` is used to represent integer data types.  
Integers are whole numbers that can have positive, negative, and zero values but no decimal values.

Int values can take `2<sup>32</sup>` distinct values from `-2147483648` to `2147483647`.

### float and double

`float` and `double` are used to hold real numbers.  
In C, floating-point numbers can also be represented in exponential. For example:

```C
float factor = 22.44e2;
```

The difference between `float` (single precision float data type) and `double` (double precision float data type) is that of size. `float` is 4 bytes long and `double` is 8 bytes long.

### char

`char` is used to declare a character type variable. For example:

```
char test = 'h';
```

### void

`void`  means "nothing" or "no type". You can think of void as **absent**.  
For example, if a function is not returning anything, its return type should be `void`.

Note: you cannot create variables of `void` type.

### short and long

The `long` keyword is used to denote a large number.

Similarly, the `short` keyword can be used to store small numbers (from `-32,767` to `32.767`). The `short` data type is generally used when you need to manage memory and store something while using minimal memory.

### signed and unsigned

The `signed` and `unsigned` keywords are type modifiers. You can alter the data storage of the data type by using them. For example:

```C
unsigned int x;
int y;
```

Here, the variable `x` can hold zero and positive values as it has the `unsigned` modifier.

### bool

The `bool` keyword is used to declare a boolean data type.  
A boolean variable can have one of the two values: `true` or `false`.

In C, we need a header file to use the `bool` data type:

```C
// Include header file
#include <stdbool.h>

bool yes = true;
bool no = false;
```

## Derived Data Types

Data types that are derived from other fundamental data types are derived types. For example: arrays, pointers, function types, structures, etc.

More about them later.
