# Input and Output (I/O)

Today we will write the first proper program in C.

## Output

`print f` is one of the main output function used in C. This function sends formatted output to the screen. Here's an example:

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
  // Displays the string inside quotations
  printf("Learn C");
  return 0;
}
```

Now let's breakdown the program line by line.  
- The first line `#include <stdio.h>` tells the compiler to include the `stdio.h` header file which has important functions and data for input and output.  
- All valid C programs must contain the `main()` function. The code execution begins from the `main` function.
- Just like a variable, functions should have a type defined that denotes the return type for the function.
- Functions are code blocks enclosed in curly brackets `{}` that are used to carry out certain functions.
- The line `printf("Learn C");`, as noted in the comment, prints the line `Learn C` to the screen.
- The `return 0;` statement inside the main function returns the `int` value 0 as the "Exit status" of the program.

### Format Specifiers

We encountered [Format Specifiers](https://byte-sized-code.github.io/LearnC/2.%20Data%20Types.html#basic-types) in the previous lesson. We can use format specifiers for various data types to substitute values into string while printing.

If that seems complicated, just take a look at the examples below:

**Integer Output**  

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
  int test = 5;
  printf("Number = %d", test);
  return 0;
}
```

Output of the program:

```
Number = 5
```

`%d` is the format specifier for `int` data types. The value `%d` inside the quotations is replaced by the `int` value stored in the variable `test`.

**Float and Double Output**  

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
  float num1 = 13.5;
  double num2 = 12.4;

  printf("Number 1 = %f\n", num1);
  printf("Number 2 = %lf", num2);
}
```

Output of the program:

```
Number 1 = 13.500000
Number 2 = 12.400000
```

The format specifiers are again replaced by the values passed on to the `printf` function.  
Note the use of the newline character (\n) that is used to create a new line before printing out the second statement.

**Print Characters**  

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
  char ch = 'a';
  printf("character = %c", ch);
  return 0;
}
```

Output of the program:

```C
character = a
```

## Input

`scanf` is the function commonly used to take input from the user. The `scanf` function reads formatted input from the standard input such as keyboards.

### Example with Numbers

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    int testInteger;
    printf("Enter an integer: ");
    scanf("%d", &testInteger);  
    printf("Number = %d",testInteger);
    return 0;
}
```

Output of the program:

```
Enter an integer: 4
Number = 4
```

Here we have used the `%d` format specifier again inside the `scanf` function to take `int` input from the user. When the user enters an integer, it is stored in the `testInteger` variable.

Notice that we have used `&testInteger` inside `scanf`. `%testInteger` gets the address of `testInteger` and the value entered by the used is stored in that address.

Similarly, we can use different format specifiers to read different data types (`float`, `double`, etc).

### Example with Characters

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    char chr;
    printf("Enter a character: ");
    scanf("%c",&chr);     
    printf("You entered %c.", chr);  
    return 0;
}   
```

Output of the program:

```
Enter a character: g
You entered g
```

When a character is entered by the user in the above program, the character itself is not stored. Instead, an integer value (ASCII value) is stored.  
When we display the value using `%c` text format, the entered character is displayed. If we use `%d` to display the character, it's [ASCII value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) is printed.

**Printing ASCII values**  

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    char chr;
    printf("Enter a character: ");
    scanf("%c", &chr);     

    // When %c is used, a character is displayed
    printf("You entered %c.\n",chr);  

    // When %d is used, ASCII value is displayed
    printf("ASCII value is %d.", chr);  
    return 0;
}
```

Output of the program:

```
Enter a character: g
You entered g.
ASCII value is 103.
```

### Multiple I/O values

Here's how you can take multiple inputs from the user and display them:

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    int a;
    float b;

    printf("Enter integer and then a float: ");

    // Taking multiple inputs
    scanf("%d%f", &a, &b);

    printf("You entered %d and %f", a, b);  
    return 0;
}
```

Output of the program:

```
Enter integer and then a float: -3
3.4
You entered -3 and 3.400000
```
